Goals for Lect. 15
Cont'd from pumps (Chap. 11) Specific speed 
Introduction to external flow over bodies and its application 
Boundary layer (BL) for external flows and comparison with internal flows 
Displacement thickness in BL, and time permitting start of discussion about BL equations
Chapter 7 – Flow over Immersed Bodies

This type of flow is important for:
Airplanes
Cars, trains
Ships
Buildings (CN Tower)
A “shear and no-slip" zone exists near the surfaces; and away from a surface, flow can be considered inviscid (can use Euler Equations, see chapter 3)


A “patching” technique is used to relate the viscous B.L. to inviscid outer flow
Patch: relate pressure in inviscid region to viscos stress in B.L.
Patching is not always possible, so to understand the flow experiment or CFD should be used on theoretical treatment is not available e.g. 1 < Re < 1000

Compassion between External & Internal B.L



Special case of low Re < 1000

Flow “sees” the plate & forms a B.L. (aka – viscous region) before reaching the plate
Usually, this flow is seen for  and only way to study details of flow is by experiment or CFD, “patching” possible.
Higher Re number flows: In such cases there is possible to find .
If flow is laminar,  one can show:
, x – local on the plate – calculate Re at local x, 
B.L. begins at the plate unlike the case for 

For other bodies above Eq. Will not work ! expermient or CFD
If flow is turbulent:    (x for plate)


Note a B.L. border is not a streamline (see highlighted region in Fig)
Q1. Is growing faster in lam or turbant flow?
Q2. Is larger in lam or turbulant flow?
Sec 7.2
In chap. 3, we showed that drag (D) on a plate (bx X) is
             (1)

Von karman wrote Eq(1) in the form of momentum thickness ()
                 (2) (Measure of drag)
Where 
Is a measure of drag (momentum deficit)
It can be shown  (w-wall) (3)
Up to now all relationships apply to both lam & turbulent flow. But assuming a parabolic form for u(x), Van Karman showed for a laminar flow:

Knowing 
Considering Eq (3), we get , within 10% of earlier equation for ￼
Q. Why is there a 10% difference?
It can be shown that:
  [Cf – skin friction coefficient, for plate] , which is accurate within 10%
NOTE: Read about “Displacement Thickness from your textbook. Displacement Thickness is the displacement of the streamline in the free flow by the B.L. to hold the conservation of the mass valid.


Specific (Sec 11.4)
If we eliminate D between , and consider the BEP, it can be shown that:
              (9), 
where n – rps, H*- head at BEP, Q* - flow rate at BEP
Industrial version of N’s,   => (Q – gpm (gel/min)
Giving, 
The value of Ns is in that indicates what type of pump design (axial centirfugal, mixed) is the must efficient machine for a given H & Q, see fig 11.11
One can also find the minute required NPSH, by using
NPSH specific speed:             (11)
IF Nss > 1800, pump may cavitate (emperically found)
Consider a pump geometrically similar to the 9-in-diameter pump of Fig. P11.34 to deliver 1200 gal/min of kerosene at 1500 rpm. Determine the appropriate (a) impeller diameter; (b) shut-off head; (c) maximum efficiency; and (d) BEP horsepower. The pump rotational speed for water is 1760 RPM

NOTE: We’re “cheating” a bit by using similarity going from water to kerosine!
Eq(5)  water
449 – conversation of gpm to ft 3/9
1760 – RPM of pump read off chart
60 – to conv to RPS 
12 – conv. Ft
Reversive (see the note): 
Shuff_off Eq(4) 

Usingg Eq(8) 
(0.77 - read that off the chart)
Using Eq 5 for Cp:

P11.65 An 11.5-in diameter centrifugal pump, running at 1750 rev/min, delivers 850 gal/min and a head of 105 ft at best efficiency (82%). (a)Can this pump operate efficiently when delivering water at 20°C through 200 m of 10-cm-diameter smooth pipe? Neglect minor losses. (b)If your answer to (a) is negative, can the speed n be changed to operate efficiently? (c)If your answer to (b) is also negative, can the impeller diameter be changed to operate efficiently and still run at 1750 rev/min?
(a)Can this pump operate efficiently when delivering water at 20°C through 200 m of 10-cm-diameter smooth pipe? Neglect minor losses.
For water at , 
Convert to SI units: 
Compute Red and f:

(a) Now compute the friction head loss at 850 gal.min and see if it matches the pump head:



(b) If your answer to (a) is negative, can the speed  be changed to operate efficiently? 
At BEP, (gH/n2D2) is constant, therefore pump head is proportional to n2.  But the pipe friction loss is also approximately proportional to n2.  Thus, for any speed n, the pipe head will always be about twice as large as the pump head and not operate efficiently

(c)If your answer to (b) is also negative, can the impeller diameter be changed to operate efficiently and still run at 1750 rev/min?
This time the answer is Yes. First note the BEP dimensionless parameters, = 1750/60=29.2 rps:

Now combine these with that fact that hf is approximately propotional to n2. In SI units, 

(c)If your answer to (b) is also negative, can the impeller diameter be changed to operate efficiently and still run at 1750 rev/min?

inches Ans(c.)
This is approximately correct. Check: the pump head is 22.4 m(74 ft) and flow rate is 497 gal/min. For this flow rate, the pipe head loss is 22.3 m (73 ft).
NOTE: Part (c) is almost independent of n. For example, if n =20 rev/s, the best efficiency converges to an impeller diameter of 0,24 m (9.45 in), with Q323 gal/min and 
Fig. Chap 11:
Basic Principles and History of Industrial Pumps


Breast Pump: Ameda:History of the Breast Pump






Piping system characteristic curve to intersect pump char. curve at or near BEP to have an efficient pumping system. 

Fig 11.10

Given curve by CQ
Figure 11.8



Euler’s turbomachine equation

