Lecture 13 Notes:

Goals for today- Lecture 13
Cavitation in pumps 
Pumps and their characteristics Net Positive Suction head 
Pump Non-dimensional parameters, i.e. coefficients of capacity, head, and power 
Series and parallel pumps 

Net Positive Suction Head (NPSH):
In a pump curve, NPSH defines under what condition, the pump will cavitate i.e.  where  saturated pressure for liquid at given temp.

Cavitation Video:
Cavitation ‐Easily explained! 

If fluid will boil flow will become bubbly
(cavitation) pump vibration, extra noise, pitting of vane/blades since bubble will burst on the travel to the high press. Side (i.e. exit of pump)

*cavitation must be prevented always

Condirion to avoid cavitation (1)

NPSH-> read from pump performance curves
  total flow head
 available NPSH

Using Bernoulli for a pump intake place above a reservoir
 (2)
 both minor and major losses

Always design for hot condition!!

Sec 11.2: Basis Pump Formulas:

Power delivered to the fluid 
Power delivered to the pump (BHP) 
Pump designer wants to maximize this 
(3)  
 volumetric, Q that is last due to clearance between casing and vane/impeller/blades
 hydraulic, frictional loss over blades/vanes, outlet …
 mechanical efficiency (bearing, etc.)


 flow rate at outlet
 recirculated flow in the pump due to clearances


 frictional losses inside the pump
 total static head of the pump



 frictional losses of power due to mechanical components
 

Dimensional Pump Parameters:

 RPM,   roughness


Eliminate the dimensions
 (4)
 CH Coefficient of head

 (5)

 Cp coefficient of power
 CQ coefficient of capacity


In practice, due to high turbulence, is show to have little effect, and experiment show that for many pumps, viscosity (for a given fluid) has the same percentage effect, i.e.  term can be discounted for similarity analysis see fig.11.8
 (6)
[For geometrically similar pumps using the same liquid]

Also,  so ,  is a finction of  as well
Suctioned 

Considering above similarity rules( ) for pump will be: (7)




Eq(7) can be used to estimate the effect of changing parameters such as  etc. on Q, P & H

Note: Although due to similarity principals, one expects , but in practice (effect of  on has (8):


Larger purmps or higher Re (Q) will improve slightly the 

Note: Viscosity changes the pump p[performance drastically (see fig.11.10); There is no general eq. for, but needs testing.

Parallel & Series Pumps:

Parallel:


Each pump in a parallel arrangement should meet the required head individually
Little limitation on number of pumps to be in parallel
Series:
Parallel:



Cannot have too many pumps in series due to pressure limitation for pump casing

See Figs, 11.9

Fig. Chap 11
Basic principles and history of industrial pumps


Breast Pump 




  
Piping system characteristic curve to intersect pump char. curve at or near BEP to have an efficient pumping system

Fig 11.10

Given curve by CQ
Fig 11.8

 

 











Introduction to Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD Analysis):

Airfoil:
Airfoils are used various for various applications, from turbines blades to airplane wings

Example- simplified airfoil cross section
For example, this section of a wing can be simplified into a 2 dimensional airfoil for easier analysis.

For this example we will use the following values & assumptions: 
Fluid is air 
Velocity at inlet is 100 m/s 
No slip condition on airfoil surface Assumptions: 
2-dimensional 
Steady State 
Incompressible 
Atmospheric pressure at end of controlled volume

Physical vs. CFD:
Notice in CFD we analyze the surrounding volume of fluid, not the solid the airfoil 
This is a controlled volume analysis, 
Walls of the CV needs to be defined (yellow lines/curves) 
the walls must be at a reasonable distance from the airfoil to avoid the flow to be altered by the walls.


CFD Analysis:
There are many commercial and open source CFD codes 
Fluent (by ANSYS) 
Open Foam 
Star‐CCM+ 
Some are specialized (FINE/Marine), some are more general (Fluent)
 Percentage of Respondent 2016


Overall structure of CFD analysis
The general process for performing a CFD analysis according to NASA: 
Formulate the Flow Problem 
Model the Geometry and Flow Domain 
Establish the Boundary and Initial Conditions 
Generate the Grid 
Establish the Simulation Strategy 
Establish the Input Parameters and Files 
Perform the Simulation
Monitor the Simulation for Completion 
Post‐process the Simulation to get the Results 
Make Comparisons of the Results 
Repeat the Process to Examine Sensitivities 
Document


  L. Jawad Aziz, M. T. Nasret, Int. J. Sci& EnggRes, 5, 143, 2014

We will use Fluent in this course
To make the geometry you can use Solidworksand then import to Fluent
It is available in the counsels under ANSYS software package in Petire Building room 020 (the computer labs)

Creating the geometry for analysis The geometry can be created in SolidWorks, but then has to be imported in ANYSYS   After importing, click “Generate” for the object to appear and finish the importing process 


Mesh 
Now that there is a geometry, we can divide it into elements.
 
Mesh shape 
The mesh was generated using an automatic method, which resulted in 234 elements. 
Note that the elements are smaller in the highlighted section, this is because the program predicts greater velocity and pressure gradients in front of the airfoil.



Fluent 
Now that we have defined the geometry and the mesh size, we can continue to edit our case in “Fluent”, where we’ll set all the parameters to solve.


Two Dimensional Flow:
Continuity  
Navier-Stokes





  0
 0
 0
 0








Define Steady State
 Continuity(steady flow)
 0
Navier-Stokes (steady flow):

 


Define Incompressible Flow:
 Continuity (Incompressible Flow)
Navier-Stokes(Incompressible Flow)

 

Define material
A material can be selected (in this case air), or any other material with user defined properties (UDF), this allows the user to later apply the material for the system

This option assigns the material to the system, in the fluid region

Define material Density (ρ) and viscosity (μ) are known:

 

Boundary Conditions:
Now that the material is known and the equations to be used are simplified, we can specify the boundary conditions:
Continuity(Steady and Incompressible Gas)  
Navier-Stokes equations (constant density and viscosity)

 



Boundary conditions cont’d:
Inlet velocity: 
u and v are known, u = 100, v = 0, at the inlet
 
 Outlet pressure 
Pressure is know



No slip condition on walls: 
Zero velocity on first fluid layer
 
Finite Volume Technique (Fluent)
Divide the domain into control volumes (elements)
This is the mesh we created 
Integrate the differential equation over each control volume and apply the divergence theorem
To evaluate derivative terms, values at the control volume faces are needed:
have to make an assumption about how the value varies (this is called initialization) –different from Boundary Conditions.
All above results in:  a set of linear algebraic equations 
Note each element is providing 3 PDE in our example, we have 100s of elements (see the mesh), so the matrix will be a large one to solve 
Solve iteratively or simultaneously. 
 
 

The problem is now all setup:

Residuals 
The residuals are errors due to discretization of a continuous domain into mesh and solving over each element 
Usually an acceptable tolerance for this errors should be set  --this called sometimes convergence criterion 
The equations were allowed to have an error of 110 
To start,  It is a good idea to start with the default values in the software for the convergence criterion.  
In the FLUENT residuals are reported for each conservation equation.
 

The problem is now solved 

Results – Pressure contours;


 Results –Velocity Vector Field 
 
Results –Pathlines by Velocity Magnitude


How would the results change if the vane was lifted by 30˚ ?

Velocity field   -sensitivity/design analysis

Streamlines
 The end!