Lecture 18 Notes:
Lect 18 – Goals for today’s lecture
Drag force for low Re (creeping flow) 
Intro. To Lift Force 
How to calculate lift force & factors affecting lift force 
Relationship between CD and C L
The concept of stall 
Role of flaps in changing CD and CL 
Finite versus infinite wing and the effect on CD and CL 

Drag Force in Creeping (Stokes’) Flow (Re<<1)

When Re<<1 
Acceleration terms in N.S. Eqs. Are negligible
Viscous stream, is dominant since high 


Momentum eq. simplifies due to 1) as: ,  continuity incomp. Fluid
For simple shapes above eqs. Can be solved as they are linear O.D.E’s

Stokes solves them for a sphere and found CD theoretically as:
,  dia. Of sphere,  sphere in creeping flow
Accounts up to 
      dia. Of sphere
See problem 7.725

Lift Force:
Lift force is the force that an object in an external flow experience in the normal direction to the drag force.
Unlike drag force that is mostly to be avoided (reduction of losses), lift force is a desirable force. Drag is only useful to stop an object. E.g., parachute
Lift force is usually associated with useful work.
Note: If lift force is in the negative y direction, sometimes it is called downforce

The lift force allows an airplane to take off and remain afloat in the air or a wind turbine to twirl and produce mechanical work to run a generator.

Moment around a lift force axis is called yaw.

Lift Force Resulted from Pressure Differences:
Lift force is normally produced as a result of pressure differential between two sides of the object w.r.t. the drag force plan
If the 2D body is symmetric w.r.t. incoming free stream flow no lift is produced as Ptop=Pbottom

If the 2D body is not symmetric w.r.t. incoming flow, then lift is produced

Lift Force Calculation:
Lift coefficient(CL) concept is used to calculate Lift Force (L) similar to CD used for drag force calculations but the area used is diff.
 where  platform(ex. Wing area)
 is found by experiments (eg. NACA NASA has a large publicly available values) or by CFD

What affects ?
Re, α, and shape (similar to CD)
For airfoils or hydrofoils, there is a sweet spot where  CL is max and CD is min to produce the max work or performance
For common airfoils:

See Figs. 7.24 & 7.25

A pilot usually wants to fly at 1.2Vs, where  Vs stall value and α<12°
Recall: The use of flaps were to increase the lift at lower vel. So for ex., stall can be avoided. (stall was significant loss of lift force due to a) redirection of speed b) angle of attach)

Theoretically it can be show that:
(CL Theory)  where  deg., 2hmax. combos, c chord length (1)

Stall Vel: ,  lift, W weight, CL max
, CL max

Two Complicating Factors for Lift Force Calculation:
Tapered wing shape
    b span of wing

Finite span
The CL values in plots are for a 2D airdoil (infinite span)
Aspect Ratio = AR =
AR can come α to increase (effective )
(2)
Combining Eqs. 1 & 2

The associated drag increase is 
Or ,  infinite span

Figs Chap 7:

 
Nozzle: 
Decreasing 
pressure 
and area 
Increasing 
velocity 
Favorable 
gradient 

Throat: 
Constant 
pressure 
and area 
Velocity 
constant 
Zero 
gradient 

 
Diffuser: 
Increasing pressure 
and area 
Decreasing velocity 
Adverse gradient 
(boundary layer thickens) 

Figure 7.24




Figure 7.25:

Figure 7.26:

Flaps:

Figure 7.28:


Finite wing Versus Infinite Wing:
Two benefits of wing let increase lift (a bit), decrease drag by weakening the vorticious
Wing let (reduces vortex)
Done poorly winglets, can increase flow separation and skim drag despite the feet that vorticious one reduced.




