First Lecture
Who is stronger a solid or a fluid?


Our Goals for Today (lect. 2)
Understand shear stress in liquids
Viscosity & its temperature and pressure dependance

Before we start... What are we after in Studying Fluid Dynamics?
Pressure field/values
Velocity Field
Work
Forces
Power
Losses
Pressure
Drag/resistive force

What is the main difference between a solid and a liquid?
Fluids do not keep their shape under any stress
Stems from ability of liquid molecules to move around

Aside: the terms Fluid Dynamics and Fluid Mechanics are used interchangeably in this course and mean largely the same thing

Solid vs Fluid
A solid can resist a shear stress (τ) by a static deformation, but a fluid cannot!
What happens when a fluid experiences a shear stress?
It flows!


At a given time, δt, The larger the τ, the larger will be δθ, so 

A constant shear stress, causes a strain (δθ) that is changing with time, at a rate of .
Eq (1) à 		Newton’s law for viscosity
Where  is the viscosity (proportionality constant)

Viscosity is the resistance of a fluid to motion.
à  unit is  or 
 or 1 cP (centi-poise)
 
Viscosity is a thermodynamic property, so: 
Where T = temperature and P = Pressure
 changes significantly with temperature.
For gases,

Known  at  (273K)
n is a constant (for air 0.7)

But for liquids,  decreases with temperature

a and b are constants that depend on the type of liquid
why different between gas & liquid?
, and P↑ so does  for all fluids.
If  is divided by fluid density (ρ), it is called kinematic viscosity (v).
 )
For water v = 1c or 
In fluid mechanics, we’re not interested in strain rate (unlike solid mechanics), but care about velocity distribution  with in the fluid. Let’s see how we can match strain to velocity. 

 à (for small strains & elements) 
						à 


From Eqs. (2 & 3):





 



Example: Skating on ICE!
Let’s assume ice between skate and surface is melted. What is the relative profile within the liquid film?

Assumption:

1 – The flow is one dimensional in x-direction, i.e. u(x) = u(z) = 0, u(y) ≠ 0
2 – no pressure variation in x direction
Let’s consider force balance over a fluid element
 
From force balance 

If the person is not accelerating, then  is a constant,  is a constant (water), then the integral can be solved as:

B.C.
at y = 0  u = 0  a = 0
at y = h à u = v  v = 0 +  è 

 (linear velocity profile)

Summary for today’s lecture


Viscosity charge with T&P
Intermolecular forces is the origin if viscosity
Difference between solid & liquid in terms of strain
Proportionality between velocity & shear stress

Our Goals for Today (lect. 3)
Non-Newtonian Fluids
Various ways to study fluid dynamics
Newtonian vs Non-Newtonian Fluid
