MECH 3202   Fluid Dynamics
York University 
Course  Outline
Fall Term - Sept 8 – Dec. 6, 2022


Instructor:	A. Amirfazli	BRG 433E	   	alidad2@yorku.ca

TAs 

Taz 	Islam		tahzinul@yorku.ca
Peirre 	Lesbats 	plesbats@yorku.ca
Ismail Alkomy 	ialkomy@yorku.ca
Mahsheed Rayhani 	reyhanimahshid@gmail.com
Yasaman Ghazi	ysmngz@gmail.com

Course description  
This course introduces key concepts and methods in solving problems in fluid mechanics. Topics covered include: External flow; boundary layers; momentum theories; similitude; fluid friction, drag and lift; fluid friction in pipes and minor losses; fluid machineries; pipe networks; time permitting flow at high Reynolds numbers including shock waves. 

Graduate Attributes-MECH 3202
1- A knowledge base for engineering 
2- Problem analysis

Prerequisite: MECH 2202; and recommended enrollment in MECH3201

Office Hrs: Tue 2:30-3:00 pm, or better by appointment 	

Course format
All tutorials/classes are in person. Attendance by students is needed to succeed in this course.
No recording of the sessions is provided, unless there is an exceptional asynchronous delivery of the materials. You will be notified through eClass for times the class will be asynchronous. 

Tutorials: Tutorial sessions are opportunities to solve and learn about problems similar to what you will be tested, and also to learn about Computational Fluid Dynamics. It is also the time to work on your Infographics and get hints as how to complete them.  

One must attend the designated Tutorial session as per one’s registration, with the exception of changing your session to the Friday Tutorial from other sessions.

TUTR 01 T 16:30 PSE  321
TUTR 02 R 15:00 PSE  321 
TUTR 03 F 11:30 LSB  101 

Lectures will start form Sept. 8th, but tutorials will begin on the week of Sept. 12; no tutorials on the week of Dec. 5th, or during the reading week. 

eClass: Check the site for MECH 3202 frequently for notices, assignments and all updates regarding this course (pay attention to the emails sent through this system).

Text:	Fluid Mechanics, 8th ed (or other eds.), Frank. M. White, McGraw-Hill, 2016, ISBN: 978-0073398273. An electronic version of the book is available for a fee from eClass (make sure to opt out, if you do not want to have it from eClass site before deadline).

Examples of useful texts:   Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, Fox and McDonald, 8th Ed, Philip J. Pritchard, Wiley, 2011. Fluid Mechanics Fundamentals and Applications, 3rd Ed, Yunus Cengel, John Cimbala, James W. Nilsson, Susan Riedel, McGraw-Hill, 2013, Any other classical Fluid Dyn./Mechanics is also fine. Also watch: learnfluidmechanics.org


Course Evaluation


Evaluation Scheme:	Seven Assignments:		14%  
				CFD assignment			6%
				Two Concept Videos 		6% (3% each)
				Six Infographics			12% 
				Two Quizzes: 			30% (15% each)
				Final:				32%
                        Total:				100%


1- EXAMINATIONS
Examination Dates:	Quiz 1: Oct 18th     	(materials to cover: Sept 8- Oct 4 inclusive)  (in class hours)
				Quiz 2: Nov 22nd  	(materials to cover: Oct 6- Nov 8 inclusive)  (in class hours)
				Final: TBD    	     	(materials to cover: all)                        
	
All examinations will be in person
			
Calculators:	Only approved calculators of non-communicating type should be used during examinations.

The quiz will be closed book, however, a formula sheet may be available. Also, if necessary, tables and graphs for material properties etc. will be given. There will be no re-write quiz for excused absence; the mark of the missed quiz will be spread over other exams (maximum of one quiz can be missed with a valid reason).

Final exam will cover all the material presented in the course, and it will be OPEN BOOK.

For quizzes and final exam no computer and online resources (including apps, websites, etc.) is allowed for aid with solving problems. All communication devices or any web enabled device other than the computer used to do the exam/quiz must be switched off, solution aids are not allowed. All problems must be solved only by the individual student without receiving any aid from anyone, or in any form.

2- ASSIGNMENTS

1. Assignments consist of problem sets relevant to the topics discussed in the class.
2. A Copy of the assignment solutions must be uploaded to the course website no later than 11:59pm on the due date to receive credit. 
3. Late assignments will not receive credit.
4. Marked assignments normally will be returned 7 days after its due date. Please feel free to discuss any points you wish regarding your assignments with your TA/instructor.
5. See the calendar for all dates related to the assignments
6. CFD assignment: A computational Fluid dynamics (CFD) assignment will be given on Oct 25th, which has two parts to it. This assignment due dates are: Nov. 11 (for part 1) and Dec. 7th, 2022 (for part 2).
7. Special instructions for CFD and Video assignments will be provided on eClass.
8. Infographics will be marked as well (see course calendar for deadlines).
	

Course Learning Outcomes: After finishing the course successfully, the student shall:

1. Identify the fundamental kinematics of a fluid element (e.g., pathlines, streaklines, streamlines, and flow regimes: laminar & turbulent) in fluid flow. 
2. Recognize the boundary layer concept and apply it to compute the lift, drag, and moments in inviscid and steady state flows acting on simple profiles.
3. Apply dimensional analysis to analyze fluid dynamics in flow problems. 
4. Employ the conservation principles of mass, linear momentum, and energy to develop models that describe different types of fluid flow. 
5. Describe the performance characteristics of pumps, and/or turbines in different configurations in order to select the appropriate ones in given engineering applications.


Ethics:	Student code of conduct shall be forced to its full extent. The York University is committed to the highest standards of academic integrity and honesty. Students are expected to be familiar with these standards regarding academic honesty and to uphold the policies of the University in this respect. Students are particularly urged to familiarize themselves with the provisions of the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (see www.yorku.ca/oscr/codeofrr.html) and avoid any behavior which could potentially result in suspicions of cheating, plagiarism, misrepresentation of facts and/or participation in an offence. Academic dishonesty is a serious offence and can result in suspension or expulsion from the University. 
* Recording of lectures/seminars is permitted only with the prior written consent of the instructor/guest speaker or if recording is part of an approved accommodation plan.


NETiquette

In all online communications (e.g., email, online discussion, or other forms of online communications), please consider the guidelines from the Core Rules of Netiquette by Virginia Shea (http://www.albion.com/netiquette/corerules.html). Sometimes, online behaviour can appear to be inappropriate or disrespectful that it requires attention and follow up. In this case, please make sure you let your instructor know immediately so that the right resources can be identified to help.


Format Requirements for written work
Your written work must contain the following parts: (1) Title, (2) name and student ID  (3) page number, (4) date, and (5) body of the text with appropriate subheadings, if needed. 
1. Use Appendices as needed to keep the main text and main figures focused to roughly 8 pages
2. Line spacing – 1.5; font – Arial, size 11.
3. References (if any) should be in standard format given below.
o References should be indicated by number(s) in square brackets in line with the text.  References should be numbered in the order in which they appear in the text.
o Examples for formatting references:
[1] John AB, Wilson BC, Smith CD.  The method of referencing.  Journal of Energy 2006; 100(1):51-61.
[2] Bird DE, Kumar EF.  The concept of energy planning.  7th ed. Edmonton, Alberta, Canada: Pearson; 2006.
      [3] Dravid R, John AB, Lawson BC. The art of modeling. Available from www.modeling.ca (accessed on May 1, 2012).
4. If uploading your written work to course website you must name the file using the following syntax: Name _final-rpt_Mech3202.doc (acceptable formats are: *.doc or *.docx)     for example:   Jane_Doe- Final-rpt-_Mech3202.doc

Course Calendar

The course calendar provides the approximate dates for the topics to be covered; there may be some deviations between dates and topics to be covered.

The dates for assignments and all other activities are firm and exact.





